README.md, before:

# Steer-Clear-Backend
Backend and web app repo for Steer Clear app

## TODO

* Replace temp secret key with secure key

* Create custom api exceptions

* add error checking/exception handling for database operations

* add api key for google distancematrix api

##Setup and Installation
`clone` project and `cd` into directory

Create virtualenv

`$ virtualenv --no-site-packages env`

Activate virtualenv

`$ source env/bin/activate`

Install requirements

`$ pip install -r requirements.txt`

Activate OS specific environment variables settings

    #Linux/Mac
    $ source ./scripts/setup.sh
   
    #Windows - do this is cmd not powershell. you might need to use setx instead
    > set STEERCLEAR_SETTINGS=settings\windows_settings.py

Create Database (NOTE: this will delete old database at the moment)

`$ python create_db.py`

Check that all tests pass

`$ nosetests`

Run app

`$ python runserver.py`

App will now be accesible through `localhost:5000`

##Testing

To run tests use **nosetests**

`$ nosetests`

## Helpful Scripts
There a few helpful scripts for doing things such as creating a new user or ride request

### create_db.py
* Creates and sets up the database
* **NOTE: THIS WILL DELETE ALL DATA CURRENTLY IN THE DATABASE**
* **TODO:** Change to use database migration

### /scripts/hail_ride.sh
* Creates a new ride request object
* **server must be running**

### /scripts/create_user.py
* Creates a new User
* Prompts for username/password input
* Displays message if user already exists

## Login
At the Moment, login is done with a username and password. We will be switching to just using an email address and a per session random cookie for login later.

### GET /login
* Returns the login page

### POST /login
* Route to actually log a user in
* Takes a form with a **email** and **password** field. 
* On success, redirects to **index** page.
* On failure, returns login page again

### GET /logout
* **requires user to be logged in**
* Logs the current user out of the system

## Registering Users
You can register a new user (assuming the user does not already exist) by making a simple POST request with a username and password field

### GET /register
* Returns the register page

### POST /register
* Creates a new user. 
* Takes a form with a **email** and **password** field. 
* If the user already exists return the register page again and a 409 status code
* **TODO** add error message

## Driver Portal
Desktop app that allows steerclear drivers to log in and manage the queue of ride requests

### GET /index
* **requires driver be logged in**
* Returns the ride request queue management page (not really implemented yet)

## API
* All API routes require that the user be logged in
* All API routes are prefixed by **/api/**

## Ride Request Objects
Ride request objects have several fields:

* **id**: id number of the ride object in the queue

* **num_passengers**: number of passengers in the ride request

* **start_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the pickup location

* **start_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the pickup location

* **end_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the dropoff location

* **end_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the dropoff location

* **pickup_time**: estimated pickup time as a datetime object

* **travel_time**: estimated time it will take in seconds to go from pickup location to dropoff location

* **dropoff_time**: estimated time for arriving at the dropoff location as a datetime object

## Rides
API endpoint for getting, updating, and deleting ride requests

### GET /api/rides/<int:ride_id>
Sample request **GET /api/rides/2**:

    {
      "ride": {
        "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:24:49 GMT", 
        "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
        "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
        "id": 2, 
        "num_passengers": 4, 
        "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:21:58 GMT", 
        "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
        "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
        "travel_time": 171
      }
    }

* Returns the ride request object with the corresponding **ride_id**
* **ride_id** is an integer
* returns 404 if the ride request does not exist

### DELETE /api/rides/<int:ride_id>
* Deletes the ride request with id **ride_id**
* Returns status code 204 on success
* If there is no ride request object with the  **ride_id**, return 404

## RideList
API endpoint for getting the lists of all ride requests or creating a new ride request.

### GET /api/rides
Sample Response:

    {
        "rides": [
        {
          "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:18:50 GMT", 
          "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
          "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
          "id": 1, 
          "num_passengers": 4, 
          "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:15:59 GMT", 
          "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
          "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
          "travel_time": 171
        }, 
        {
          "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:24:49 GMT", 
          "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
          "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
          "id": 2, 
          "num_passengers": 4, 
          "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:21:58 GMT", 
          "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
          "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
          "travel_time": 171
        }
      ]
    }

* Returns the queue of ride requests as a json object

### POST /api/rides
* Creates a new ride request
* Returns the created ride object on success (this will most likely change to just returning the created ride id).
* returns error code 400 on failure
* Expects a form with the following fields
  * **id**: id number of the ride object in the queue

  * **num_passengers**: number of passengers in the ride request

  * **start_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the pickup location

  * **start_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the pickup location

  * **end_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the dropoff location

  * **end_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the dropoff location

  * **pickup_time**: estimated pickup time. See note below for string format

  * **travel_time**: estimated time it will take in seconds to go from pickup location to dropoff location

  * **dropoff_time**: estimated time for arriving at the dropoff location. see note below for string format

  * **NOTE**: the **pickup_time** and **dropoff_time** fields are datetime objects representing UTC times that are formatted as strings using the following format string **"%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S GMT"**. Where **%a** is the weekday's abreviated name (i.e. Mon), **%d** is the day of the month as a zero-padded decimal number (i.e. 09 and 22), **%b** is the month's abreviated name (i.e. Sep), **%Y** is the four digit year value (i.e. 2015), **%H** is the hour zero-padded hour value (i.e. 02 or 20), **%M** is the zero-padded minute value (i.e. 05 or 52), and **%S** is the zero-padded seconds value (i.e. 06 or 33).

Commit message:

updated readme with intructions to get default cofig file

README.md, after:

# Steer-Clear-Backend
Backend and web app repo for Steer Clear app

## TODO

* Replace temp secret key with secure key

* Create custom api exceptions

* add error checking/exception handling for database operations

* add api key for google distancematrix api

##Setup and Installation
`clone` project and `cd` into directory

Create virtualenv

`$ virtualenv --no-site-packages env`

Activate virtualenv

`$ source env/bin/activate`

Install requirements

`$ pip install -r requirements.txt`

**NOTE:** You need the default_settings.py config file for backend to work. Get from one of the repo overseers

Activate OS specific environment variables settings

    #Linux/Mac
    $ source ./scripts/setup.sh
   
    #Windows - do this is cmd not powershell. you might need to use setx instead
    > set STEERCLEAR_SETTINGS=settings\windows_settings.py

Create Database (NOTE: this will delete old database at the moment)

`$ python create_db.py`

Check that all tests pass

`$ nosetests`

Run app

`$ python runserver.py`

App will now be accesible through `localhost:5000`

##Testing

To run tests use **nosetests**

`$ nosetests`

## Helpful Scripts
There a few helpful scripts for doing things such as creating a new user or ride request

### create_db.py
* Creates and sets up the database
* **NOTE: THIS WILL DELETE ALL DATA CURRENTLY IN THE DATABASE**
* **TODO:** Change to use database migration

### /scripts/hail_ride.sh
* Creates a new ride request object
* **server must be running**

### /scripts/create_user.py
* Creates a new User
* Prompts for username/password input
* Displays message if user already exists

## Login
At the Moment, login is done with a username and password. We will be switching to just using an email address and a per session random cookie for login later.

### GET /login
* Returns the login page

### POST /login
* Route to actually log a user in
* Takes a form with a **email** and **password** field. 
* On success, redirects to **index** page.
* On failure, returns login page again

### GET /logout
* **requires user to be logged in**
* Logs the current user out of the system

## Registering Users
You can register a new user (assuming the user does not already exist) by making a simple POST request with a username and password field

### GET /register
* Returns the register page

### POST /register
* Creates a new user. 
* Takes a form with a **email** and **password** field. 
* If the user already exists return the register page again and a 409 status code
* **TODO** add error message

## Driver Portal
Desktop app that allows steerclear drivers to log in and manage the queue of ride requests

### GET /index
* **requires driver be logged in**
* Returns the ride request queue management page (not really implemented yet)

## API
* All API routes require that the user be logged in
* All API routes are prefixed by **/api/**

## Ride Request Objects
Ride request objects have several fields:

* **id**: id number of the ride object in the queue

* **num_passengers**: number of passengers in the ride request

* **start_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the pickup location

* **start_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the pickup location

* **end_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the dropoff location

* **end_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the dropoff location

* **pickup_time**: estimated pickup time as a datetime object

* **travel_time**: estimated time it will take in seconds to go from pickup location to dropoff location

* **dropoff_time**: estimated time for arriving at the dropoff location as a datetime object

## Rides
API endpoint for getting, updating, and deleting ride requests

### GET /api/rides/<int:ride_id>
Sample request **GET /api/rides/2**:

    {
      "ride": {
        "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:24:49 GMT", 
        "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
        "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
        "id": 2, 
        "num_passengers": 4, 
        "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:21:58 GMT", 
        "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
        "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
        "travel_time": 171
      }
    }

* Returns the ride request object with the corresponding **ride_id**
* **ride_id** is an integer
* returns 404 if the ride request does not exist

### DELETE /api/rides/<int:ride_id>
* Deletes the ride request with id **ride_id**
* Returns status code 204 on success
* If there is no ride request object with the  **ride_id**, return 404

## RideList
API endpoint for getting the lists of all ride requests or creating a new ride request.

### GET /api/rides
Sample Response:

    {
        "rides": [
        {
          "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:18:50 GMT", 
          "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
          "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
          "id": 1, 
          "num_passengers": 4, 
          "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:15:59 GMT", 
          "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
          "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
          "travel_time": 171
        }, 
        {
          "dropoff_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:24:49 GMT", 
          "end_latitude": 37.280893, 
          "end_longitude": -76.719691, 
          "id": 2, 
          "num_passengers": 4, 
          "pickup_time": "Sun, 07 Jun 2015 02:21:58 GMT", 
          "start_latitude": 37.273485, 
          "start_longitude": -76.719628, 
          "travel_time": 171
        }
      ]
    }

* Returns the queue of ride requests as a json object

### POST /api/rides
* Creates a new ride request
* Returns the created ride object on success (this will most likely change to just returning the created ride id).
* returns error code 400 on failure
* Expects a form with the following fields
  * **id**: id number of the ride object in the queue

  * **num_passengers**: number of passengers in the ride request

  * **start_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the pickup location

  * **start_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the pickup location

  * **end_latitude**: latitude coordinate for the dropoff location

  * **end_longitude**: longitude coordinate for the dropoff location

  * **pickup_time**: estimated pickup time. See note below for string format

  * **travel_time**: estimated time it will take in seconds to go from pickup location to dropoff location

  * **dropoff_time**: estimated time for arriving at the dropoff location. see note below for string format

  * **NOTE**: the **pickup_time** and **dropoff_time** fields are datetime objects representing UTC times that are formatted as strings using the following format string **"%a, %d %b %Y %H:%M:%S GMT"**. Where **%a** is the weekday's abreviated name (i.e. Mon), **%d** is the day of the month as a zero-padded decimal number (i.e. 09 and 22), **%b** is the month's abreviated name (i.e. Sep), **%Y** is the four digit year value (i.e. 2015), **%H** is the hour zero-padded hour value (i.e. 02 or 20), **%M** is the zero-padded minute value (i.e. 05 or 52), and **%S** is the zero-padded seconds value (i.e. 06 or 33).
